FISH-386: scope validation property doc (#274)
payara/Payara-Community-Documentation: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/documentation/payara-server/public-api/openid-connect-support.adoc

OpenID Client can be configured with both `@OpenIdAuthenticationDefinition` annotation attributes and Microprofile Config properties.

CAUTION: If you are using MicroProfile Config properties and the value contains a placeholder that should not be resolved by MicroProfile Config
itself but by the Server (like `payara.security.openid.redirectURI=${baseURL}/Callback`) make sure the value is properly escaped. It will otherwise result in `NoSuchElementException`. Here's an example how such a value should be escaped: `payara.security.openid.redirectURI=\\${baseURL}/Callback`

The annotation and MicroProfile properties have several configuration options. They are detailed below.

> .Configuration Options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Configuration Options For `@OpenIdAuthenticationDefinition`
```
I suggest that we make it clear that this table is for the main annotation and we add another table under this table with options for the `@OpenIdProviderMetadata` annotation too. Currently we have at least 2 options to document, which are scattered through this documentation: `disableScopeValidation` (mentioned in a separate section) and `endSessionEndpoint` mentioned in the description of the `notifyProvider` option.

Author: already fixed

| @LogoutDefinition
| Defines the functionality that is performed when the user logs out and defines the RP Session Management configuration.
|
|
|===

NOTE: If both an annotation attribute and a MicroProfile Config property are defined for the same option
then the MicroProfile Config property value always takes precedence over the `@OpenIdAuthenticationDefinition` annotation value.

> 

Reviewer: Move the table about `@OpenIdProviderMetadata` options to the main configuration section and add configuration about `endSessionEndpoint`.

```suggestion

.Configuration Options For `@OpenIdProviderMetadata`
|===
| Option | MP Config property | Description | Default value

| `endSessionEndpoint`
| `payara.security.openid.provider.endSessionEndpoint`
| OIDC provider’s logout endpoint URL. If set, overrides the URL obtained via the `end_session_endpoint` element of the OIDC provider’s metadata.
|  

| `disableScopeValidation`
| `payara.security.openid.disableScopeValidation`
| This property disables the scope validation for custom scope configurations
| false 

```

| @LogoutDefinition
| Defines the functionality that is performed when the user logs out and defines the RP Session Management configuration.
|
|
|===

NOTE: If both an annotation attribute and a MicroProfile Config property are defined for the same option
then the MicroProfile Config property value always takes precedence over the `@OpenIdAuthenticationDefinition` annotation value.

.Configuration Options For `@OpenIdProviderMetadata`
|===
| Option | MP Config property | Description | Default value

| `endSessionEndpoint`
| `payara.security.openid.provider.endSessionEndpoint`
| OIDC provider’s logout endpoint URL. If set, overrides the URL obtained via the `end_session_endpoint` element of the OIDC provider’s metadata.
|  

| `disableScopeValidation`
| `payara.security.openid.disableScopeValidation`
| This property disables the scope validation for custom scope configurations
| false 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|===
```

To enable re-evaluation of the configuration for each user session, set the MicroProfile Configuration property `payara.security.openid.sessionScopedConfiguration` to `true`. To specify it directly in the application, you can place it in the https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-config-1.4/microprofile-config-spec.html#default_configsources[microprofile-config.properties] file in the `META-INF` directory on the classpath (in a WAR application it could be in `WEB-INF/classes/META-INF`).

With this enabled, it's possible to use EL expressions to dynamically adjust the configuration before each authantication attempt, e.g. based on any information in the incoming HTTP request. The information about the HTTP request can be retrieved from a `HttpServletRequest` object injected using `@Inject`.

IMPORTANT: It's not possible to use a different configuration for just a subset of secured resources. Once a user is authenticated, the authentication information is saved in the HTTP session. All secured resources will be accessed using the same user, having the same roles, until the user logs out.

[[example-multitenant]]

> === Example multitenant authentication

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Example Multitenant Authentication
```

[[user-information-from-the-id-token]]
== User information from the ID Token

The following property is added to get user information from the ID Token.

NOTE: To integrate with Microsoft ADFS this property will be needed because by default Microsoft ADFS doesn't provide user information from the /userinfo endpoint.

.Configuration Option
|===
| Option | MP Config property | Required | Description | Default value | Requirements

| `userClaimsFromIDToken`
| `payara.security.openid.userClaimsFromIDToken`
| false
| Enables to get the user information from the ID Token
| false
| This property should be use in case it is needed to get the user information from the ID Token.

|===

[[user-information-from-the-id-token-example]]
=== Example

[source, java]
----
@OpenIdAuthenticationDefinition(
       providerURI = "https://sample-openid-server.com",
       clientId = "87068hgfg5675htfv6mrucov57bknst.apps.sample.com",
       clientSecret = "{my-secret}",
       redirectURI = "${baseURL}/callback",
       userClaimsFromIDToken=true
)
public class SecurityBean {

}
----

[[disable-scope-validation]]
== Disable scope validation

> To disable the scope validation it is needed to use the following property of the `OpenIdProviderMetadata`.

Reviewer: I suggest adding more detail, for example:
```suggestion
By default, Payara OpenID Connect connector validates that a scope is reported as a supported scope by the provider. However, some providers support more scopes than they actually report as supported scopes. In order to disable the validation and allow using such scopes, it's possible to use the following property of `@OpenIdProviderMetadata`:
```

Author: already done

.Configuration Options
|===
| Option | MP Config property | Description | Default value

| disableScopeValidation
| payara.security.openid.disableScopeValidation

> | This property disable the scope validation for custom scope configurations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| This property disables the scope validation for custom scope configurations
```

- The `getClaims()` method - Gets the User Claims that were received from the userinfo endpoint.
- The `getProviderMetadata()` method - The OpenId Connect Provider's metadata document fetched via provider URI.

[[user-information-from-the-id-token]]

> == User information from the ID Token

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== User Information from the ID Token
```

The following property is added to get user information from the ID Token.

NOTE: To integrate with Microsoft ADFS this property will be needed because by default Microsoft ADFS doesn't provide user information from the /userinfo endpoint.

.Configuration Option
|===
| Option | MP Config property | Required | Description | Default value | Requirements

| `userClaimsFromIDToken`
| `payara.security.openid.userClaimsFromIDToken`
| false
| Enables to get the user information from the ID Token
| false
| This property should be use in case it is needed to get the user information from the ID Token.

|===

[[user-information-from-the-id-token-example]]
=== Example

[source, java]
----
@OpenIdAuthenticationDefinition(
       providerURI = "https://sample-openid-server.com",
       clientId = "87068hgfg5675htfv6mrucov57bknst.apps.sample.com",
       clientSecret = "{my-secret}",
       redirectURI = "${baseURL}/callback",
       userClaimsFromIDToken=true
)
public class SecurityBean {

}
----

[[disable-scope-validation]]

> == Disable scope validation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Disable Scope Validation
```

By default, Payara OpenID Connect connector validates that a scope is reported as a supported 
scope by the provider. However, some providers support more scopes than they actually report as
supported scopes. In order to disable the validation and allow using such scopes, it's possible to

> use the following property of `OpenIdProviderMetadata`.
> 
> .Configuration Options For `@OpenIdProviderMetadata`
> |===
> | Option | MP Config property | Description | Default value
> 
> | disableScopeValidation
> | payara.security.openid.disableScopeValidation
> | This property disables the scope validation for custom scope configurations
> | false 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use the `disableScopeValidation` property of `OpenIdProviderMetadata`. See the <<configuration>> section for more details about this option.
```

|===

[[disable-scope-validation-example]]
=== Example

[source, java]
----
@OpenIdAuthenticationDefinition(
       providerURI = "https://sample-openid-server.com",
       clientId = "87068hgfg5675htfv6mrucov57bknst.apps.sample.com",
       clientSecret = "{my-secret}",
       redirectURI = "${baseURL}/callback",
       providerMetadata = @OpenIdProviderMetadata(disableScopeValidation = true))
public class SecurityBean {

}
----

[[bearer-auth]]

> ## Bearer Authentication and Authorization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Bearer Authentication and Authorization
```

In order to authenticate and authorize calls between services using the OpenID mechanism, it is possible to use authorization compatible with https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6750[RFC 6750]. In this case, the access token presented to the resource service is an JWT token that is used to verify that the caller has access to OAuth2 protected resources.

[[obtaining-token]]

> ### Obtaining JWT Token

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Obtaining JWT Token
```

Obtaining the token is specific to the OAuth provider and the application. The usual approach is using https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749#section-4.4[Client Credentials Grant], where an application posts its clientId and secret to identity provider and receives access and refresh tokens in return.

[[passing-token]]

> ### Passing Token To The Resource Service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Passing Token To The Resource Service
```

The obtained access token is passed with every request to the resource service by adding it into the `Authorization` HTTP header:

```
Authorization: Bearer access__token
```

[[processing-token]]

> ### Processing Bearer Authorization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Processing Bearer Authorization
```

```
@ApplicationScoped
@DeclareRoles({"user", "calendar-reader"})
public class Auth0BearerIdentityStore extends BearerGroupsIdentityStore {

    @Override
    protected Set<String> getCallerGroups(AccessTokenCallerPrincipal callerPrincipal) {
        if (callerPrincipal.hasAudience("https://example.org/api/user")) {
            // if the token is for USER api, set this group
            return Set.of("user");
        }
        if (callerPrincipal.hasAudience("https://example.org/api/delegate")
                // delegate API is further constrained by scope
                && callerPrincipal.getAccessToken().getScope().contains("read:calendar")) {
            return Set.of("calendar-reader");
        }
        return Set.of();
    }
}
```

NOTE: Payara Platform also provides similar functionality by xref:documentation/microprofile/jwt.adoc[MicroProfile JWT Authentication], which is however limited only to securing JAX-RS resources. On the other hand, the OpenID Connect Bearer Authentication and Authorization feature is better aligned with the OpenID Connect support in Payara Platform and can also be used to secure other resources like servlets.

[[specific-providers]]

> == Integration with specific providers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Integration with Specific Providers
```

| `userClaimsFromIDToken`
| `payara.security.openid.userClaimsFromIDToken`
| false
| Enables to get the user information from the ID Token
| false
| This property should be use in case it is needed to get the user information from the ID Token.

|===

[[user-information-from-the-id-token-example]]
=== Example

[source, java]
----
@OpenIdAuthenticationDefinition(
       providerURI = "https://sample-openid-server.com",
       clientId = "87068hgfg5675htfv6mrucov57bknst.apps.sample.com",
       clientSecret = "{my-secret}",
       redirectURI = "${baseURL}/callback",
       userClaimsFromIDToken=true
)
public class SecurityBean {

}
----

[[disable-scope-validation]]
== Disable Scope Validation

By default, Payara OpenID Connect connector validates that a scope is reported as a supported 
scope by the provider. However, some providers support more scopes than they actually report as
supported scopes. In order to disable the validation and allow using such scopes, it's possible to
use the `disableScopeValidation` property of `OpenIdProviderMetadata`. See the <<configuration>> section for more details about this option.

> |===

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

}
----

[[microsoft-adfs-integration]]

> ==== Microsoft ADFS integration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Microsoft ADFS Integration
```

To enable the integration for Microsoft ADFS it is needed to use the new property: userClaimsFromIDToken. See <<user-information-from-the-id-token>> for more information.

[[azure-ad-scope-validation]]

> ==== Azure AD scope validation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Azure AD Scope Validation
```
